---
title: Git Guide
image: /assets/images/shubham-beeharry-223969.jpg
categories:
    - DevOps
    - Version Control
    - Git
mermaid: false
layout: post
---

## Git Areas

>"Git has three main states that your files can reside in: committed, modified, and staged."

All files can be found on your working tree area and you can see them by running `git status`. Git will start tracking files when they are staged or added to the staging area, and to do so, you need to run `git add <file or directory name>`.

Now if you track new files or make changes on the already tracked ones, you need to somehow move them to your local repository. The git command `git commit -m "message"` takes all changes in the Staging Area, wraps them together and puts them in your Local Repository. 

## Commands

1. `git init`: creates an empty git repo, which is a _.git_ directory with subdirectories for objects. _HEAD_ is also created to point to the _HEAD_ of the _master_ branch.
2. `git add <file or directory name>`: adds files to the staging area. To commit changes, firstly files need to be added to staging.
3. `git commit -m "message"`: moves tracked files from staging to your local repository. 
4. `git status`: non tracked and modified files will be displayed.
5. `git push`: it will push your local repository to the configured remote repository (Github, Gitlab, Bitbucket...).
6. `git config --global user.name/use.email`: configures the name and email to be used with your commits.
7. `git clone`: clones a repository in a new directory.
8. `git fetch`: downloads remote repository changes.
9. `git merge <branch_name>`: merges branch into current branch.
10. `git pull`: fetches and merge remote changes on your local repository (`git fetch` + `git merge`).
11. `git rebase <branch_name>`: reapplies commits of a branch on top of your current branch.
12. `git stash`: parks unfinished changes that you can reapply later.
13. `git stash list`: shows stored stashes.
14. `git stash apply`: applies most recent stash. Supply a stash id to apply a particular stash.
15. `git log`: lists the commits made in your local repository. You can add options and filters (`-p`: difference in each commit; `--stat`: abbreviated stats for each commit; `--pretty=<oneline/short/full/format:"%h - %an, %ar : %s">`; `--graph`: graph with branch and merge history).
15. `git branch <branch_name>`: creates branch with the given name.
16. `git checkout <branch_name>`: switch to given branch name. If `-b` option is provided it will create the branch if it does not exist.
17. `git reflog`: shows reference logs, so you can see if references of commits were updated.
18. `git reset <commit_id>`: reverts a particular git commit.


## .gitignore

>"A gitignore file specifies intentionally untracked files that Git should ignore. Files already tracked by Git are not affected"

You can specify patterns to ignore a particular folder or set of files.

### Generate `.gitignore` 

```shell
curl -s https://www.gitignore.io/api/{your_list} >> .gitignore
```

Replace `{your_list}` with a comma-separated list of technologies. e.g.

```shell
curl -s https://www.toptal.com/developers/gitignore/api/macos,intellij,java,maven >> .gitignore
```

